captainmcglue
=============
<p>Steve Cullen (MLIS, 14203622) IS30320 Current Trends in Social Computing.
Gephi Graph Report.</p>

<p>The following short piece will report on the social graph I created with open source software Gephi as part of a lab assignment for ‘Current Trends in Social Computing’. Taking data from my eighteen year old daughter’s Facebook profile, via Netvizz, this was then exported into Gephi to produce the graph. Gephi is a popular software package which analyses and visualises network data. The terms used when discussing the graph may be unfamiliar to most readers  but are not difficult to explain. For example we have nodes, edges, influence, bridging, bonding, degree, betweeness, closeness, and centrality. All these terms will be explained over the course of the report. 
The basic structure of the graph consists of nodes and edges. The nodes being the individuals and the edges being the links or lines between the nodes.  Yet there is more going on in the  graph than simply who is connected to whom. There are a number of different centralities which can be taken into consideration when analysing the graph. The first these is ‘degree centrality’. This simply defines the number of links on a particular node. Closeness centrality is what it says, and shows how close the pairs of nodes are to each other in terms of a social distance between two individuals. This is similar to the idea of ‘six degrees of seperation’ where the shortest number of connections are sough between nodes. 
 Betweeness centrality differs from closeness centrality inasmuch as it  measures the number of times a node travels between two other nodes. Therefore it is the quantity of times nodes are connected rather than distance. It can be argued that those individuals with a high number of betweeness centrality have more influence than those which might have shorter distances to travel, but have fewer connections to others. 
Eigenvector centrality differs from the previous measurements in the following way.    This type of centrality measures how those individuals with high betweeness are connected to each other.  Nodes are also connected by degree, meaning two people can  be connected, but in differing ways. For example a connection may be directed one way, whereby Jane knows Joan, but Joan does not Jane, or it could be two way where Jane and Joan know each other. 
    The final terms to consider are bonding and bridging which are two different types of connectivity. Bonding are those connections which are in small clustered group, this appears a lot in the graph which used my daughter’s data. Bridging differs in the way it shows connections between various clusters which are not as closely connected. <br />
The process of creating the graph was interesting but also frustrating. I found the software unstable and difficult to use. Having made several attempts to make a graph every time a preview was attempted the program refused to create a pdf. This is a problem with some open source software which is often still in beta and can be temperamental to use.  With no clear tutorial made available and minimal training in how the program functioned it was a process similar to ‘stabbing around in the dark’ where through trial and error I finally gave in, and ended up  searching on YouTube for assistance. <br />
Presenting data in a visual form like a Gephi graph can be visually arresting and interesting to analyse in terms of how networks (or people) interact with each other. However I would be cautious and mindful of the imponderables the data does not supply, and it would be fair to assert that  a graph does not give the whole picture when it comes to illustrating social media  relationships and activity. </p>
